# SanskritConversion
Abstract

This paper focuses on extracting text from ancient Sanskrit manuscripts and converting them to English using two machine learning approaches, Transformers (for machine translation) and Conv+LSTM (for extracting text from images of manuscripts). Sanskrit language has a complex grammar with limited corpora which can be difficult to process and convert it into the desired language. Dataset available is also limited on platforms like Hugging Face. The Transformer approach uses BERT models from HuggingFace API which can be used after fine tuning with our dataset and a custom Transformer model made from scratch in which the dataset was feeded to achieve translation from Sanskrit to English. The Dataset that was used in this paper for text extraction is a Nepali Character dataset available on github and for translation model line by line translation of Gita from Sanskrit to English was used. To extract text from the manuscripts computer vision techniques are used so that the text can be extracted from manuscripts, image denoising and segmentation of characters. These segmented characters were then passed to the Conv+LSTM model which was able to extract features from the images and text was extracted sequentially with the help of LSTM network. The extracted text is passed into the machine learning model and analysis is done by comparing the BLEU(BiLingual Evaluation Understudy) scores that the model will be returning. The accuracy of the proposed translation model came out to be 72.11% while considering the complex grammar of Sanskrit language and the proposed text extraction model was fine tuned with missing characters in the dataset which resulted in CER around 2.5%, while the WER reached approximately 7.5%.
